The President of India is the Supreme Commander of all Indian armed forces and by 
virtue of that fact is the national Commander-in-chief of the Air Force. 
The Chief of the Air Staff with the rank of Air chief marshal is the Commander

The Indian Air Force is divided into five operational and two functional commands.
 Each Command is headed by an Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief with the rank of 
Air Marshal. The purpose of an operational command is to conduct military operations 
using aircraft within its area of responsibility, whereas the responsibility of 
functional commands is to maintain combat readiness. Aside from the Training Command 
at Bangalore, the primary flight training is done at the Air Force Academy 
(located in Hyderabad), followed by operational training at various other schools. 
Advanced officer training for command positions is also conducted at the Defence 
Services Staff College; specialised advanced flight training schools are located at 
Bidar, Karnataka and Hakimpet, Telangana (also the location for helicopter training). 
Technical schools are found at a number of other locations



Structure of Indian Air Force
The President of India is the Supreme Commander of all Indian armed forces and by virtue 
of that fact is the national Commander-in-chief of the Air Force.
 Chief of the Air Staff with the rank of Air Chief Marshal is the Commander of
 the Indian Air Force. He is assisted by six officers, all with the rank of
 Air Marshal:
Vice Chief of the Air Staff
Deputy Chief of the Air Staff
Air Officer in Charge of Administration
Air Officer in Charge of Personnel
Air Officer in Charge of Maintenance
Director General of Inspection and Flight Safety.
v
In January 2002, the government conferred the rank of Marshal of the Air Force 
on Arjan Singh making him the first and only Five-star officer with the 
Indian Air Force and ceremonial chief of the air force.

Formation of Indian Air Force

Commands
The Indian Air Force is divided into five operational and two functional commands.
 Each Command is headed by an Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief with the rank of 
Air Marshal. The purpose of an operational command is to conduct military operations
 using aircraft within its area of responsibility, whereas the responsibility of 
functional commands is to maintain combat readiness. Aside from the Training Command 
at Bangalore, the center for primary flight training is located at the Air Force
 Academy in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, followed by operational training at various 
other schools. Advanced officer training for command positions is also conducted at 
the Defence Services Staff College; specialized advanced flight training schools are 
located at Bidar, Karnataka, and Hakimpet, Andhra Pradesh (also the location for 
helicopter training). Technical schools are found at a number of other locations.

 Here is a list of Commands:
Operational Commands
Central Air Command (CAC), headquartered at Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh
Eastern Air Command (EAC), headquartered at Shillong, Meghalaya
Southern Air Command (SAC), headquartered at Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
South Western Air Command (SWAC), headquartered at Gandhinagar, Gujarat
Western Air Command (WAC), headquartered at Subroto Park, New Delhi
Functional Commands
Training Command (TC), headquartered at Bangalore, Karnataka
Maintenance Command (MC), headquartered at Nagpur, Maharashtra
Wings
A Wing is a formation intermediate between a Command and a Squadron. It generally consists of two or three IAF Squadrons and Helicopter Units, along with Forward Base Support Units (FBSU). FBSUs do not have or host any Squadrons or Helicopter units but act as transit airbases for routine operations. In times of war, they can become fully fledged air bases playing host to various Squadrons. In all, about 47 Wings and 19 FBSUs make up the IAF. Wings are typically commanded by a Group Captain.
Squadrons
Squadrons are the field units and formations attached to static locations. Thus, a Flying Squadron is a sub-unit of an air force station which carries out the primary task of the IAF. All fighter squadrons are headed by a Commanding Officer with the rank of Wing Commander. Some Transport squadrons and Helicopter Units are headed by a Commanding Officer with the rank of Group Captain.
Flights
Flights are sub-divisions of Squadrons, commanded by a Squadron Leader.
Within this formation structure, IAF has several service branches for day-to-day operations. They are:
Flying Branch
Flying
Technical Branch
Engineering
Ground Branch
Logistics
Administration
Accounts
Education
Medical & Dental
Meteorological